docs: ADR: Separation of Request and Response schemas (#3869)
Unleash/unleash: website/docs/contributing/ADRs/overarching/separation-request-response-schemas.md

---
title: "ADR: Separation of request and response schemas"
---

## Background

> During the updating of our OpenAPI documentation, we have encountered issues related to the width and strictness of our schemas for requests and responses. Currently, we are reusing the same schema for both request and response, which has led to situations where the schemas are either too wide for a response or too strict for a request. This has caused difficulties in accurately defining the expected data structures for API interactions.

Reviewer: Not sure "scope" is better but "broad" definitely is. Width in this case isn't idiomatic

```suggestion
During the updating of our OpenAPI documentation, we have encountered issues related to the scope and strictness of our schemas for requests and responses. Currently, we are reusing the same schema for both request and response, which has led to situations where the schemas are either too broad for a response or too strict for a request. This has caused difficulties in accurately defining the expected data structures for API interactions.
```

## Decision

After careful consideration and discussion, it has been decided to separate the request and response schemas to address the challenges we have encountered. By creating distinct schemas for requests and responses, we aim to improve the flexibility and precision of our API documentation.

### Advantages

Separating the schemas will allow us to establish more precise and constrained response types while enabling more forgiving request types. This approach will facilitate better alignment between the expected data structures and the actual data transmitted in API interactions.

The separation of request and response schemas will provide the following benefits:

> 1. **Enhanced clarity and correctness**: With dedicated schemas for requests and responses, we can define the precise structure and constraints for each interaction. This will help prevent situations where the schemas are overly permissive or restrictive, improving the accuracy and clarity of the API documentation.

Reviewer: For me, the correctness and maintainability is the heart of the value here. And I think this spans more than just the documentation, the unified schemas make writing code handling code much tougher and mean we're passing a lot of `undefineds` around where they aren't necessary. I'd like to see this fleshed out a little here. Personal feeling perhaps

Reviewer 2: I concur, the correctness is my main motivation for driving this. It's been annoying to me that we can't claim that we know the shape of a response object because we risk failing to handle a request object.

Author: Thanks, tried expanding a bit on it here: https://github.com/Unleash/unleash/pull/3869/commits/7bbacb8e1c64cda574ae760019d284c3414a4dce

3. **Flexibility for future enhancements**: Separating request and response schemas lays the foundation for introducing additional validation or transformation logic specific to each type of interaction. This modularity will enable us to incorporate future enhancements, such as custom validation rules or middleware, with ease.

### Concerns

While this decision brings several benefits, we acknowledge the following concerns that may arise from the separation of request and response schemas:

1. **Increased schema maintenance**: By having separate schemas for requests and responses, there will be a need to maintain and update two sets of schemas instead of a single shared schema. This could potentially increase the maintenance overhead and introduce the possibility of inconsistencies between the two schemas.

2. **Data duplication and redundancy**: With the separation of schemas, there might be instances where certain data fields or structures are duplicated between the request and response schemas. This redundancy could lead to code duplication and increase the risk of inconsistencies if changes are not carefully synchronized between the two schemas.

> 3. **Complexity of migration**: Migrating existing API implementations to adopt the separated schemas might introduce complexities and challenges. Ensuring a smooth transition without disrupting ongoing development or existing integrations requires careful planning and coordination.

Reviewer: If I understand correctly, the plan is here is do liberally apply the boyscout rule here. If that's the case then I think it's unlikely we'll do a complex migration. Only that new changes are required to incorporate this decision

Reviewer 2: True, I do not believe a big bang migration replacing all schemas at once is feasible. But applying the boyscout rule (leave things better than you found it) would mean eventually all code that is in use will be updated to separate the schemas.

We should still aim to complete the migration by the release of 6.0

Author: Good point. I yeeted this concern and added some details about our migration strategy on the conclusion:
 - https://github.com/Unleash/unleash/pull/3869/commits/81809e7b09eee11a3bd2dcaed10fa54941d3e537
 - https://github.com/Unleash/unleash/pull/3869/commits/70148a3a3ea2d6804f82e1ee5a13d8125ea5299d

> 4. **Developer adoption and understanding**: Developers who are accustomed to the previous unified schema approach may initially find it challenging to adapt to the new separation of schemas. This could potentially lead to confusion and frustration if the new approach is not clearly communicated and explained.

Reviewer: Isn't this document here for communication purposes? Seems odd to say this may be a problem in the very document that's intended to address the problem

Reviewer 2: Agreed with Simon here.

Author: Thanks, makes sense. Addressed (yeeted) in https://github.com/Unleash/unleash/pull/3869/commits/04904834ba26d34564d55bdfcb894897f13c9f0d

## Conclusion

> By implementing the separation of request and response schemas, we aim to improve the robustness and maintainability of our API documentation. This decision will empower developers to build more reliable integrations by providing clearer guidelines for both request and response data structures.

Reviewer: I think it's worth mentioning that this also has value to us, internally. This should allow us to write more robust code and do less massaging of incoming responses into the correct shapes. That in turn reduces the likelihood of bugs and makes the code significantly easier to reason about and work with

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I think we're conflating terms here. Incoming responses doesn't make sense to me. We are talking incoming requests and outgoing responses no?

The point still stands that preparing responses will be easier, and requests will accept anything, but have a predefined set of fields we'll actually need to look at, any superfluous fields can just be dropped.

Reviewer: Yuh, thanks Chris! I meant to say incoming requests, edited my original comment to reflect that, leaving this here so that your comment makes sense to people who come after

Author: Thanks, tried addressing this here: https://github.com/Unleash/unleash/pull/3869/commits/70148a3a3ea2d6804f82e1ee5a13d8125ea5299d
